== Abstract == 
Yang DiHormat Orang Kaya Indera Shahbandar ke-10, Tun Haji Abdul Razak bin Dato' Hussein, , (Jawi: عبدالرزاق بن حسين; b. 11 March 1922; d. 14 January 1976) was the second Prime Minister of Malaysia, serving from 1970 to 1976.
Tun Razak was the Prime Minister responsible in setting up Barisan Nasional, which is the ruling coalition of political parties that held power in Malaysia till 10 May 2018, with Barisan Nasional losing the 14th Malaysia General Election under his son Najib Razak, taking over from its predecessor, the Alliance. He is also renowned for launching the Malaysian New Economic Policy (MNEP).


== Early life and education ==
Born in Kampung Pulau Keladi, a village located at northwest of Pekan, Pahang on 11 March 1922, Abdul Razak is the first of two children to Yang DiHormat Orang Kaya Indera Shahbandar ke-9, Dato' Hussein bin Mohd Taib and Datin Hajah Teh Fatimah bt Daud. An aristocratic descent of Orang Kaya Indera Shahbandar, Abdul Razak studied at the Malay College Kuala Kangsar.
After joining the Malay Administrative Service in 1939, he was awarded a scholarship to study at Raffles College in Singapore in 1940. His studies at the college ceased with the onset of the Second World War. During the war he helped organise the Wataniah resistance movement in Pahang.After World War II, Abdul Razak left for Britain in 1947 to study law. In 1950 he received a law degree and qualified as barrister at Lincoln's Inn in London. During his student days in England,  Abdul Razak was a member of the British Labour Party and a prominent student leader of the Malay Association of Great Britain. He also formed the Malayan Forum.


== Involvements in World War II ==


=== Early WWII and Askar Wataniah ===
After his studies was interrupted in 1942 because of World War II, Abdul Razak returned to Kuantan, Pahang. He then meets his former colleague from the Malay Administrative Service, Yeop Mahidin and express his interest to join the Malay Regiment (now Royal Malay Regiment). Mahidin, who also the founder of Askar Wataniah Pahang ('Pahang State Territorial Army'; precursor of Rejimen Askar Wataniah) recruited Razak into his new guerrilla forces. After finishing his training under Mahidin, Razak was instructed by Mahidin to join the Japanese Malayan Civil Service as an agent and informant.


=== Informant in Japanese Administration ===
After finishing his Japanese Military Training, Razak, as an aristocrat and son of a respected Malay leader in Pahang, were posted to his home-state Pahang as an assistant to District Officer and at the same time as a bridge for the Japan to gain trust of local Pahang Malays. Using his privileges as an aristocrat, Razak starts making networking with the Japanese Imperial Forces in the same time maintaining his connection with Yeop Mahidin. His role as an informant inside the Japanese Administration is known only to a few of Wataniah members including Mahidin. Because of this, Razak was labelled as a traitor by the rest of the Wataniah Pahang.


=== Force 136 Pahang ===
At first, the Malays were not fully trusted by the British to fight the Japanese because of few incidents and better treatments by the Japanese Administration towards the Malays if compared to other races. After gaining sufficient trust, the Askar Wataniah Pahang with its 200 members was absorbed into the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and made to Force 136 Pahang.The Force 136 Pahang's missions always meet with success made the Japanese Administration began to suspect there is informants inside theirs administration. Force 136 Pahang quickly set up an extraction mission to recover theirs agent, Razak, who is unknown to many of its members.After successfully been extracted, Razak continues his work with Force 136 and was given the rank of captain. Among the notable mission Razak was involved is to rescue Sultan Abu Bakar of Pahang from MPAJA.


== Political involvement ==

Upon his return from the United Kingdom, in 1950, Tun Razak joined the Malayan Civil Service. Owing to his political calibre, he became the youth chief for United Malays National Organisation (UMNO). Two years later, he worked as the Assistant State Secretary of Pahang and in February 1955, at just 33 years of age, became Pahang's Chief Minister.
Razak stood in and won a seat in Malaya's first general elections in July 1955 and was appointed as the Education Minister. He was instrumental in the drafting of the Razak Report which formed the basis of the Malayan education system. Tun Razak was also a key member of the February 1956 mission to London to seek the independence of Malaya from the British.After the general elections in 1959, he became the Minister of Rural Development in addition to holding the portfolios of Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, which he held from 1957. His achievements include formulating the development policy known as the Red Book.


== Infusing young blood ==
At the time of Separation of Singapore from the Federation of Malaysia in 1965, Tun Razak realised that UMNO needed more young leaders in the party. Faced with, amongst other things Lee Kuan Yew's considerable rhetorical skills, Razak wanted young Malay leaders – grounded in their own faith and culture – who would be able to speak and if necessary debate both in the Malay language and English language.
Razak understood that power resided in the Malay community and that for this power to be wielded effectively, the elite among the Malays had to be an elite determined by ability, aptitude and commitment to the nation as a whole. Class, birth and money were secondary in his calculations.
As a consequence of this initiative, the then young leaders of mixed heritage in UMNO, such as Mahathir Mohamad, were drafted into higher echelons of the political establishment.
In 1967 he was awarded the Ramon Magsaysay Award for community leadership.


== Prime Ministership ==
After the 13 May Incident in 1969, his faction in UMNO overthrew Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra and imposed a State of Emergency, ruling by decree as the National Operations Council until 1970. In September 1970, Tunku Abdul Rahman was succeeded by Tun Abdul Razak as the Prime Minister of Malaysia.
Tun Razak set up the Barisan Nasional or National Front on 1 January 1973 to replace the ruling Alliance Party. He increased the membership of its parties and coalitions in an effort to establish "Ketahanan Nasional" (National Strength) through political stability.
Tun Razak is also renowned for launching the Malaysian New Economic Policy (MNEP) in 1971. He and the "second generation" of Malay politicians saw the need to tackle vigorously the economic and social disparities which fuelled racial antagonisms and violence. The MNEP set two basics goals – to reduce and eventually eradicate poverty, and to reduce and eventually eradicate identification of economic function with race.


== Death ==
Abdul Razak died in office on 14 January 1976 while seeking medical treatment in London. He was posthumously granted the soubriquet Bapa Pembangunan ('Father of Development'). He was laid to rest in Heroes Mausoleum (Malay: Makam Pahlawan) near Masjid Negara, Kuala Lumpur.


== Awards and recognitions ==


=== Honours ===
 Malaysia :
 Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (1976)
 Grand Commander of the Order of the Defender of the Realm (1959)
Tun Razak was posthumously granted the sobriquet Bapa Pembangunan ('Father of Development').
 United Kingdom :
Associate Knight of the Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem


=== Things named after him ===

Several things were named after him, including:

Tun Razak Highway (Federal Route  connecting Segamat, Johor to Gambang, Pahang)
Jalan Tun Razak in Kuala Lumpur (part of Kuala Lumpur Middle Ring Road 1)
Jalan Tun Abdul Razak in Johor Bahru (part of Skudai Highway)
Jalan Tun Abdul Razak in Ipoh (also known as Maxwell Road)
Jalan Tun Abdul Razak in Melaka City (street name for Melaka Bypass)
Jalan Tun Razak in Kota Kinabalu
Jalan Tun Abdul Razak in Gowa, Sulawesi Selatan, Indonesia (known as Jalan Hertasning Baru and Jalan Aroepala)
Jalan Tun Razak in Putrajaya
Taman Tun Abdul Razak also known as Taman TAR (a residential area in Ampang Jaya, Selangor)
Bandar Tun Razak in Kuala Lumpur
 SP14  Bandar Tun Razak LRT station
Parliamentary constituency of Bandar Tun Razak
Bandar Tun Razak, Jengka in Pahang
Bandar Tun Abdul Razak, Rompin, Pahang
Komtar Tower in George Town, Penang
Komtar JBCC in Johor Bahru, Johor
Komtar Skywalk in George Town, Penang
SK Tun Abdul Razak, a primary school in Kuala Kubu Bharu, Selangor
SMK Tun Abdul Razak, a secondary school in Selekoh, Perak
Tun Abdul Razak National Secondary School, a secondary school in Kuching, Sarawak
Tun Abdul Razak Stadium in Bandar Tun Razak, Jengka, Pahang
Tun Razak Hockey Stadium in Kuala Lumpur
SK Pusat Penyelidikan Pertanian Tun Razak, a primary school in Jerantut, Pahang
SMK Pusat Penyelidikan Pertanian Tun Razak, a secondary school in Jerantut, Pahang
Pusat Penyelidikan Pertanian Tun Razak, a scientific research base in Jerantut, Pahang
Tun Abdul Razak Research Centre (formerly known as British Rubber Producers' Research Association) in Brickendonbury, England
KD Tun Abdul Razak, a Scorpene class submarine of the Royal Malaysian Navy
Tun Abdul Razak Chancellor Hall (DECTAR) at the National University of Malaysia (UKM) in Bangi, Selangor
Tun Abdul Razak Library (PTAR) at MARA University of Technology (UiTM), Shah Alam, Selangor
Tun Razak Library, a public library in Ipoh, Perak
MRSM Tun Abdul Razak, MARA Junior Science College in Pekan, Pahang.
Sekolah Berasrama Penuh Integrasi Tun Abdul Razak (SBPITAR), an integrated boarding school in Pekan, Pahang
Sekolah Dato' Abdul Razak (SDAR), all-boys boarding school in Seremban, Negeri Sembilan.
Universiti Tun Abdul Razak (UNIRAZAK), a private university in Kuala Lumpur.
Tun Abdul Razak Residential College, one of residential college in Universiti Malaysia Perlis
Dewan Tun Abdul Razak, Menara Kembar Bank Rakyat in Kuala Lumpur
Dewan Tun Abdul Razak, a museum exhibition gallery in Kuching, Sarawak Museum
Dewan Tun Abdul Razak 1 & 2, Putra World Trade Centre, Kuala Lumpur
Dewan Kenangan Tun Abdul Razak in Baling, Kedah
Institut Teknologi Tun Abdul Razak in Petaling Jaya, Selangor
Institut Teknologi Tun Abdul Razak in Perai, Penang
Tun Abdul Razak Hockey Cup
Tun Abdul Razak Heritage Park, a public recreational park in Kuala Lumpur
Tun Abdul Razak Memorial, a memorial in Kuala Lumpur
Kem Tun Razak, a military camp in Bayan Lepas, Penang
Tun Razak Chair at Ohio University's Department of Southeast Asian Studies
Tun Razak Exchange
 SBK20  Tun Razak Exchange MRT station in Kuala Lumpur
Tun Razak Tower in Kuala Lumpur
Kolej Tun Abdul Razak, a residential college at Universiti Malaysia Perlis, Arau, Perlis
Kolej Tun Abdul Razak, a residential college at Universiti Teknologi MARA, Bukit Besi, Terengganu
Kolej Tun Razak, a residential college at Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Skudai, Johor


== In popular culture ==
Motion picture & television

Malaysian actor Zaefrul Nordin played Razak in 2007 film 1957: Hati Malaya
FFM Award Winning actor Rusdi Ramli portrayed Razak in 2013 film Tanda Putera and won his second FFM for Best Leading Actor.Stage/Theatre

FFM nominee Rashidi Ishak portrayed Razak in 2009 local theatre production Tun Razak in Istana Budaya.


== References ==


== External links ==
Tun Razak’s legacy – his vision, The Star, 2 March 2008.
The band of brothers C. S. TAN, The Star, 2 March 2008.