== Abstract == 
Again, Dangerous Visions (17 March 1972) is a science fiction short story anthology, edited by Harlan Ellison. It is the follow-up to Dangerous Visions (October 1967), also edited by Ellison. Cover art and interior illustrations are by Ed Emshwiller.
Like its predecessor, Again, Dangerous Visions, and many of the collected stories, have received awards recognition. "The Word for World is Forest", by Ursula K. Le Guin, won the 1973 Hugo for Best Novella. "When It Changed" by Joanna Russ won a 1972 Nebula Award for Best Short Story. Harlan Ellison was recognized with a special Hugo Award for anthologizing, his second special award, in 1972.Again, Dangerous Visions was released as a two-volume paperback edition by Signet in the United States, and by Pan in the United Kingdom. A sequel was planned, The Last Dangerous Visions, but was never published.
The first edition was a hardback limited release of 6,500 numbered and signed copies.


== Contents ==
Each story is preceded by an introduction written by Ellison.

Introduction: "An Assault of New Dreamers," by Harlan Ellison.
"The Counterpoint of View," by John Heidenry.
"Ching Witch!," by Ross Rocklynne.
"The Word for World Is Forest", by Ursula K. Le Guin. (Hugo Award best novella)
"For Value Received" by Andrew J. Offutt.
"Mathoms From the Time Closet," by Gene Wolfe
"Robot's Story," by Gene Wolfe.
"Against The Lafayette Escadrille," by Gene Wolfe.
"Loco Parentis," by Gene Wolfe.
"Time Travel For Pedestrians" by Ray Nelson.
"Christ, Old Student in a New School," poem by Ray Bradbury.
"King of the Hill," by Chad Oliver.
"The 10:00 Report is Brought to You By ..." by Edward Bryant.
"The Funeral" by Kate Wilhelm.
"Harry the Hare" by James B. Hemesath.
"When It Changed" by Joanna Russ. (Nebula Award for Best Short Story)
"The Big Space Fuck," by Kurt Vonnegut.
"Bounty," by T. L. Sherred.
"Still-Life," by Barry N. Malzberg (as by K. M. O'Donnell).
"Stoned Counsel," by H. H. Hollis.
"Monitored Dreams and Strategic Cremations," by Bernard Wolfe.
"The Bisquit Position," by Bernard Wolfe.
"The Girl With Rapid Eye Movements," by Bernard Wolfe.
"With A Finger in My I," by David Gerrold
"In the Barn," by Piers Anthony.
"Soundless Evening," by Lee Hoffman.
[A spot], by Gahan Wilson.
"The Test-Tube Creature, Afterward," by Joan Bernott
"And the Sea Like Mirrors," by Gregory Benford.
"Bed Sheets Are White," by Evelyn Lief.
"Tissue," by James Sallis.
"At the Fitting Shop," by James Sallis
"53rd American Dream," by James Sallis.
"Elouise And The Doctors of the Planet Pergamon." by Josephine Saxton.
"Chuck Berry, Won't You Please Come Home," by Ken McCullough.
"Epiphany For Aliens," by David Kerr.
"Eye of the Beholder," by Burt K. Filer.
"Moth Race," by Richard Hill.
"In Re Glover," by Leonard Tushnet.
"Zero Gee," by Ben Bova.
"A Mouse in the Walls of the Global Village," by Dean R. Koontz.
"Getting Along," by James Blish and Judith Ann Lawrence
"Totenbüch," by Parra y Figuéredo (as by A. Parra (y Figuerado)).
"Things Lost," by Thomas M. Disch.
"With the Bentfin Boomer Boys on Little Old New Alabama", novella by Richard A. Lupoff.
"Lamia Mutable," by M John Harrison.
"Last Train to Kankakee," by Robin Scott.
"Empire of the Sun," by Andrew Weiner.
"Ozymandias," by Terry Carr.
"The Milk of Paradise." by James Tiptree, Jr.


== See also ==
Hugo Awards
Nebula Awards
Dangerous Visions


== References ==


== External links ==
Dangerous Visions series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Again, Dangerous Visions title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database