== Abstract == 
Demetria Devonne  Lovato ( lə-VAH-toh; born August 20, 1992) is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. After appearing on the children's television series Barney & Friends as a child, she received her breakthrough role as Mitchie Torres in the Disney Channel television film Camp Rock (2008) and its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010).
Since signing with Hollywood Records, Lovato has released six studio albums, including Don't Forget (2008), Here We Go Again (2009), Unbroken (2011), Demi (2013), Confident (2015), and Tell Me You Love Me (2017). Lovato earned seven top 20 entries on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart: "This Is Me", "Here We Go Again", "Skyscraper", "Give Your Heart a Break", "Heart Attack", "Cool for the Summer", and "Sorry Not Sorry". Of her television credits, Lovato starred as the titular character on Sonny with a Chance from 2009 to 2011; was featured as a judge and mentor on the American version of The X Factor in 2012 and 2013; and appeared as a recurring character on Glee. Her struggles with bipolar disorder, addiction, an eating disorder, and self-harm received significant media attention in the 2010s, in response to which she published the book Staying Strong: 365 Days a Year (2013) and a YouTube documentary about her life and career, Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated (2017).
Lovato is a pop, pop rock, and R&B artist. She has received a number of accolades, including an MTV Video Music Award, 13 Teen Choice Awards, five People's Choice Awards, an ALMA Award, and a Latin American Music Award. Outside the entertainment industry, she has been involved with several social and environmental causes since the launch of her career. In May 2013, she was cited for her dedication as a mentor to teens and young adults with mental health challenges at a National Children's Mental Health Awareness Day in Washington, D.C.. She has also become an advocate for the LGBT community. In 2014, she became the face for the Human Rights Campaign's Americans for Marriage Equality Campaign. In April 2016, she was honored with the GLAAD Vanguard Award for her activism.


== Life and career ==


=== 1992–2006: Early life and career beginnings ===
Lovato was born on August 20, 1992 in Albuquerque, New Mexico to former Dallas Cowboys cheerleader Dianna De La Garza (née Dianna Lee Smith) and engineer and musician Patrick Martin Lovato. She has an older sister named Dallas; a younger maternal half-sister, actress Madison De La Garza; and an older paternal half-sister named Amber, to whom she first spoke to when she was 20.Lovato's parents divorced in mid-1994, shortly after her second birthday. Lovato's father was of Mexican descent, with mostly Spanish and Native American ancestors, and came from a family that has been living in New Mexico for generations; he also had distant Portuguese and Jewish ancestry. Her mother is of English and Irish ancestry. Through her father, Lovato is a descendant of Civil War Union veteran Francisco Perea and Santa Fe de Nuevo México governor Francisco Xavier Chávez. Through DNA testing Lovato discovered that she is also of 16 percent Scandinavian descent and one percent of African descent.Lovato was raised in Dallas, Texas. In 2002, she began her acting career on the children's television series Barney & Friends as Angela. She began playing piano at age seven and guitar at ten, when she also began dancing and acting classes. Lovato told Ellen DeGeneres that she was bullied so badly that she asked for homeschooling, and she received her high-school diploma through homeschooling in April 2009. She later became a spokesperson for the anti-bullying organization PACER and appeared on America's Next Top Model to speak out against bullying. In 2006, Lovato appeared on Prison Break, and on Just Jordan the following year.As of  September 2015, Lovato's name appears on the "Unclaimed Coogan" list, which is a fund for child actors whose earnings were partially withheld, but which remain unclaimed by the former child performers.


=== 2007–2008: Camp Rock and Don't Forget ===
In 2007 and 2008, Lovato played Charlotte Adams on the Disney Channel short series As the Bell Rings. Lovato auditioned for the channel's television film Camp Rock and series Sonny with a Chance during 2007 and got both roles. Lovato played the lead character, aspiring singer Mitchie Torres, in Camp Rock. The film premiered on June 20, 2008, to 8.9 million viewers. Its soundtrack was released three days earlier; however, the music was considered less current than that of High School Musical. Gillian Flynn of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Lovato's acting skills were underwhelming and she "has the knee-jerk smile of someone who is often told she has a great smile". Lovato sang four songs on the soundtrack, including "We Rock" and "This Is Me". That summer, she began her Demi Live! Warm Up Tour before the release of her debut album and appeared on the Jonas Brothers' Burnin' Up Tour.Lovato's debut album, Don't Forget, was released on September 23, 2008, and was met with generally positive reviews from critics. Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly said, "Demi Lovato might satisfy her 'tween fans but she won't be winning any rockers over with Don't Forget". The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 89,000 copies. Ten of its songs were co-written with the Jonas Brothers.Don't Forget was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for US sales of over 500,000 copies. Its lead single, "Get Back", was praised for its pop rock style and peaked at number 43 on the US Billboard Hot 100, selling over 560,000 copies in the United States. The album's second single, "La La Land", was cited for its strong rock elements and peaked at number 52 in the US, and cracked the top 40 in Ireland and the United Kingdom. The music video was directed by Brendan Malloy and Tim Wheeler.


=== 2009–2010: Sonny with a Chance and Here We Go Again ===
In 2009, Lovato recorded "Send It On", a charity single and the theme song for Disney's Friends for Change, with friends the Jonas Brothers, Miley Cyrus and Selena Gomez. All proceeds from the song were donated to environmental charities supported by the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund. Lovato's Disney Channel sitcom Sonny with a Chance, with her character Sonny Munroe, the newest cast member of the show-within-a-show So Random!, premiered on February 8. Lovato's acting ability was described by Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times as "very good", and he compared her favorably to Hannah Montana star (and friend) Miley Cyrus. That June, she starred as Rosie Gonzalez / Princess Rosalinda in the Disney Channel film, Princess Protection Program. The film, the fourth highest-rated Disney Channel original movie, premiered to 8.5 million viewers.

Lovato's second album, Here We Go Again, was released on July 21, 2009; she described its acoustic style as similar to that of John Mayer. The album received favorable reviews from critics who appreciated its enjoyable pop-rock elements, echoing reviews of Don't Forget. Lovato's first number-one album, it debuted atop the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 108,000 copies. Before its release, she began her Summer Tour 2009. The album's lead single, "Here We Go Again" peaked at number 59 on the Billboard Hot 100 and managed to peak at number 15, becoming Lovato's highest peaking solo single at the time, The song peaked at number 68 on the Canadian Hot 100 and 38 in New Zealand. The album's second and final single, "Remember December" failed to match the success of its predecessor, but it peaked at number 80 on the UK Singles Chart.
The entertainer made her first 40-city national concert tour, Live in Concert, in support of Here We Go Again. The tour, from June 21 to August 21, 2009, had David Archuleta, KSM and Jordan Pruitt as opening acts and Lovato and Archuleta received the Choice Music Tour award at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards. In March 2010, Lovato and Joe Jonas recorded "Make a Wave" as the second charity single for Disney's Friends for Change. In May, Lovato guest-starred as a teenage schizophrenic Hayley May in the sixth-season Grey's Anatomy episode, "Shiny Happy People". Although critics praised her versatility, they were underwhelmed by her acting and felt that her appearance was designed primarily to attract viewers. Later that year, she headlined her first international tour, the South American Tour, and joined the Jonas Brothers Live in Concert tour as a guest.Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, with Lovato reprising her role as Mitchie Torres, premiered on September 3, 2010. Critics were ambivalent about the film's plot, and it has a 40-percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. However, Lovato's performance was called "dependably appealing" by Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly. The film premiered to eight million viewers, the number-one cable-television movie of the year by the number of viewers. Its accompanying soundtrack was released on August 10 with Lovato singing nine songs, including "Can't Back Down" and "Wouldn't Change a Thing". The soundtrack debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 41,000 copies. The Jonas Brothers Live in Concert was reworked to incorporate Lovato and the rest of the film's cast; it began on August 7, two weeks later than planned. The Sonny with a Chance soundtrack was released on October 5; Lovato sang on four tracks, including "Me, Myself and Time". It debuted (and peaked) at number 163 on the Billboard 200, her lowest-selling soundtrack.


=== 2011–2012: Unbroken and The X Factor ===

That month, Lovato also announced her departure from Sonny with a Chance, putting her acting career on hiatus and ending the series; she later said that she would return to acting when she felt confident doing so. Her departure led to the spin-off series So Random! with the Sonny cast, featuring sketches from the former show-within-a-show. The series was cancelled after one season. Lovato released her third album, Unbroken, on September 20, 2011. Begun in July 2010, the album experimented with R&B and featured less pop rock. The album and the stylistic change received mixed reviews from critics, who saw a growth in musicianship because of her struggles and have praised Lovato's vocals but found the music more generic than her previous efforts. The record was a commercial success, peaking at number four on the Billboard 200, with sales exceeding 97,000 copies in its first week of release, and going on to sell over 500,000 copies in the United States, being certified Gold.The album's lead single, "Skyscraper", noted for its messages of self-worth and confidence, peaked at number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100, selling 176,000 downloads during the first week of release, becoming Lovato's highest first week sales, until the release of "Heart Attack" by Lovato in 2013. The song also Lovato's highest-peaked single since "This Is Me" reached number nine in August 2008. The song also debuted at number two on the Hot Digital Songs chart. "Skyscraper" received the Best Video With a Message award at the September 2012 MTV Video Music Awards. The album's second and final single, "Give Your Heart a Break", peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 16, making Lovato's fourth highest peaking song. Also, it has peaked at number 12 on the US Adult Top 40 chart, number 1 on the US Pop Songs chart and became the longest climb by a female artist to No. 1 in the Pop Songs chart history. In April 2014, the song was certified three-times platinum by the RIAA; as of  October 2014, it has sold 2.1 million digital copies.In May, she became a judge for the second season of the American version of The X Factor, with a reported salary of one million dollars. Joining Britney Spears, Simon Cowell and L.A. Reid, it was speculated that she was chosen to attract a younger audience. Mentoring the Young Adults category, her final act (CeCe Frey) finished sixth. At the Minnesota State Fair in August, Lovato announced that after a pre-show performance at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards she would release a single by December. On December 24, she released a video on her YouTube account of herself singing "Angels Among Us" dedicated to the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. In March, she was confirmed as returning for The X Factor's third season, with her salary reportedly doubling.


=== 2013–2014: Demi ===

Demi was released on May 10, 2013, the album features influences of synthpop and bubblegum pop and was met with generally positive reviews from music critics, although Jon Carmichael of The New York Times found Lovato's transition fun, according to Entertainment Weekly it signified a less-mature image. The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 110,000 copies, the best-selling debut week of Lovato's career. It was also successful internationally, charting in the top ten in New Zealand, Spain and the UK. and has been certified Gold in the US.On June 11, Lovato released an e-book, Demi, on iBooks. Her lead single, "Heart Attack," debuted at number 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100, with first-week sales of 215,000 copies. The song peaked at number 10 (Lovato's third showing in the US top ten), and was also successful in the UK, Australia and Europe. The second single, "Made in the USA" peaked at number 80 on Billboard Hot 100 chart. The third single from Demi, "Neon Lights", peaked in the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 36 and in the US Hot Dance Club Songs at number one. The fourth single; "Really Don't Care" featuring British singer Cher Lloyd, became Lovato's third number one hit on the US Dance chart and debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 98 before rising to peak position number 26.Lovato later released a deluxe version of her fourth studio album, which was to include 7 new tracks, consisting of 4 live performances and 3 studio recordings. One of these songs included a collaboration with Olly Murs on a song for his fourth studio album, entitled "Up". Lovato contributed to The Mortal Instruments: City of Bones soundtrack album with "Heart by Heart".Lovato planned to appear in at least six episodes of the fifth season of Glee, however she only appeared four episodes in the series. She played Dani, a struggling New York-based artist who befriends Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) and Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera) and interacts with fellow newcomer Adam Lambert's character. Lovato debuted in the season's second episode, which aired on October 3. On November 19, she released a book, Staying Strong: 365 Days a Year, which topped The New York Times bestseller list. The entertainer then agreed to write a memoir, which has yet to be released.She announced her Neon Lights Tour (including a Canadian leg) on September 29, 2013, which began February 9, 2014 and ended May 17. On October 21, she released "Let It Go" for the Disney film Frozen, which was released in theaters on November 27, and the song was promoted as the single for the film's soundtrack. The song peaked in the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 38, spending twenty weeks on the chart. On May 18, 2014, "Somebody to You" featuring Lovato was released as the fourth single from The Vamps' debut album, Meet the Vamps. On May 29, she announced her fourth concert tour (and first world tour, covering 25 cities), the Demi World Tour, and its first North American dates. In November 2014, Lovato opened the UK shows on Enrique Iglesias's Sex and Love Tour. She also worked with her longtime friend Nick Jonas on a song for his self-titled album called "Avalanche," released November 2014. Lovato was featured on "Up", the second single from Olly Murs' fourth studio album, Never Been Better.Lovato announced her skincare line called Devonne by Demi to be available in December 2014. She released a music video for her song "Nightingale" on December 24, 2014 as an early Christmas present for her fans.


=== 2015–2016: Confident ===

Lovato's fifth album, Confident, was released on October 16, 2015, and received generally positive reviews from music critics. The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 98,000 copies. During the album's production, Lovato commented: "I've already started recording for my new album, and I have plans to record during the tour. The sound just evolves into everything that I've been and everything that I want to become." She further stated, "I've never been so sure of myself as an artist when it comes down to confidence, but not only personal things, but exactly what I want my sound to be and what I know I'm capable of and this album will give me the opportunity to show people what I can really do."In July 2016, the album was certified gold by the RIAA, and has sold 211,000 copies in the United States. In May 2015, Billboard revealed Lovato was in the process of starting an "artist-centric" new record label, Safehouse Records, of which she will be co-owner. The label will be a partnership between her, Nick Jonas, and Lovato's manager Phil McIntyre, and will form part of a new collaborative arrangement with record label Island. Confident was released through the new venture deal. This will be Lovato's second multi-label venture of her career; she was formerly part of Jonas Records, a UMG/Hollywood/Jonas Brothers partnership, which is now defunct.Lovato released the lead single from Confident titled "Cool for the Summer" on July 1, 2015. On September 18, 2015, the title track "Confident" was released as the album's second single. On October 17, 2015, she performed a "Cool for the Summer" and "Confident" medley, as well as "Stone Cold" on Saturday Night Live during the series' forty-first season. Lovato was also featured on the re-release of "Irresistible", the fourth single from Fall Out Boy's sixth studio album American Beauty/American Psycho. The same month, she signed with the major modeling agency, Wilhelmina Models. Lovato released the music video for her R&B-infused song "Waitin for You" featuring American rapper Sirah on October 22, 2015. On October 26, 2015, Lovato and Nick Jonas announced that they would tour together on the Future Now Tour. She was honored with the first-ever Rulebreaker Award on December 11, 2015 at the 2015 Billboard Women in Music event. On March 21, 2016, "Stone Cold" was serviced as the third and final single from Confident. On July 1, 2016, Lovato released a new single titled "Body Say" to promote her tour.


=== 2017–2018: Tell Me You Love Me ===

In February 2017, Lovato executive-produced a documentary, Beyond Silence, which follows three individuals and their experiences with mental illnesses including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety. Lovato featured in Cheat Codes' song "No Promises", released in March 2017, and Jax Jones's "Instruction" along with Stefflon Don, released in June 2017. In 2017, Lovato was included in Time's annual list of the 100 most influential people. On May 8, 2017, she announced a collaboration with sportswear line Fabletics to support the United Nations' initiative, Girl Up.In July 2017, Lovato released "Sorry Not Sorry" as the first single from her sixth album, which became her highest charting song in New Zealand and the United States at number 6 as well as Australia at number 8. The album, titled Tell Me You Love Me, was released on September 29 and opened at number three on the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 48,000 copies. It received positive reviews from music critics. On October 17, Lovato released a documentary titled Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated on YouTube. In October 2017, Lovato announced tour dates for the North American leg of her Tell Me You Love Me World Tour, with special guests DJ Khaled and Kehlani. She confirmed European and South American legs of the tour in the following months, and the tour commenced in February 2018.In November 2017, Lovato released a song titled "Échame la Culpa" with Luis Fonsi. Lovato performed at the March for Our Lives anti-gun violence rally in Washington, D.C. on March 24, 2018. In May, Christina Aguilera released a track from her album Liberation titled "Fall in Line" featuring Lovato, and she was also featured on Clean Bandit's song "Solo". The latter became Lovato's first number-one song in the United Kingdom. On June 21, the singer released a new single titled "Sober" which she referred to as "my truth" and discusses struggles with addiction and sobriety.


=== 2019: Upcoming seventh studio album ===
In mid 2018, Lovato began working on her upcoming seventh studio album.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===
Lovato has listed Christina Aguilera and Kelly Clarkson as her biggest influences. Her other influences include Britney Spears, Rihanna, Keri Hilson, Jennifer Lopez, Aretha Franklin, Gladys Knight, Mariah Carey, Whitney Houston, Alexz Johnson, Billie Holiday, and Billy Gilman. About Gilman she said, "We had the same voice range when I was young. I would practice to his songs all the time." Lovato listened to metal music in her teens and has said that John Mayer's songwriting has been a "huge influence" on her and that after the release of Unbroken, her musical style shifted towards hip hop and R&B.Lovato says, "I had a lot of respect for Whitney Houston, and Christina Aguilera, on some songs where she was really amazing and wasn't trying to be sexy or anything like that." About her admiration for Clarkson, Lovato says, "I just thought she was a great role model. She was never publicly seen drinking and driving or wearing really scandalous clothes or anything like that. I feel like she set a really great example and she was extremely talented." Lovato's The Neon Lights Tour was "inspired by Beyoncé."


=== Voice ===
Nick Levine of Digital Spy, commenting on her vocals for her album, Don't Forget, stated, "she's certainly a stronger singer than the Jonases. In fact, her full-bodied vocal performances are consistently impressive." Becky Brain of Idolator wrote that Lovato has a "killer voice and the A-list material to put it to good use." According to Sophie Schillaci of The Hollywood Reporter, the entertainer "has a voice that can silence even the harshest of critics. Something not often found in her peers."
For Lovato's second studio album, Here We Go Again, Jeff Miers from The Buffalo News wrote, "Unlike so many of her Disney-fied peers, Lovato can really sing...[and it's] refreshing [she doesn't need Auto-Tune] to mask any lack of natural ability."Upon working with Lovato on her third studio album, Unbroken, Ryan Tedder stated, "Demi blew me out of the water vocally! I had no idea how good her voice is. She's one of the best singers I've ever worked with. Literally, that good... I mean, she's a Kelly Clarkson-level vocalist. And Kelly has a set of pipes." He also commented on their work together on the song "Neon Lights" from Lovato's fourth studio album, saying, "She, in pop music, has one of the biggest ranges, possibly the highest full voice singer I've ever worked with." Tamsyn Wilce from Alter the Press commented on her vocals on Demi, stating "it shows just how strong her vocal cords are and the variation of styles that she can completely work to make her own."In a review for the Neon Lights Tour, Mike Wass from Idolator commented "you don't need shiny distractions when you can belt out songs like Demi and connect with the crowd on such an emotional level."
In a review for the Demi World Tour, Marielle Wakim from Los Angeles Magazine commented on Lovato's vocals, stating, "For those who haven't bothered to follow Lovato's career, let's get something out of the way: the girl can sing. Get over your fear of being judged by your Facebook friends and Spotify her discography, because you're going to have the last laugh five years down the road (probably sooner) when she wins a Grammy. At 22 years old, her vocal range is astounding." She went on to further describe her vocals as "spectacular."


== Personal life ==


=== Residence ===
On her 18th birthday, Lovato bought a Mediterranean-style house in Los Angeles, California; however, she decided to live in a "sober house" in Los Angeles after leaving rehab in January 2011.


=== Relationships ===
Lovato was romantically linked to Camp Rock co-star Joe Jonas during her time as a Disney Channel star, but revealed years later that they only dated for "a month or two" in 2010. From 2010 to 2016, Lovato was in a relationship with actor Wilmer Valderrama. In the summer of 2016, Lovato began dating UFC mixed martial artist Luke Rockhold. They split in January 2017. She then dated another MMA fighter, Guilherme Vasconcelos, until May 2017.Lovato had no interest in forging a relationship with her late father, Patrick, after his divorce from her mother. She has been vocal about her abusive and strained relationship with her father and once stated, "He was mean, but he wanted to be a good person. And he wanted to have his family, and when my mom married my stepdad, he still had this huge heart where he said, 'I'm so glad that [he's] taking care of you and doing the job that I wish I could do'." She has written multiple songs about him. Patrick died of cancer on June 22, 2013, at age 53. After his death, Lovato said that he had been mentally ill, and in his honor she created the Lovato Treatment Scholarship Program.


=== Personal issues ===
Lovato had suffered from depression, an eating disorder, self-harm, and being bullied before she went into rehab at the age of 18. On November 1, 2010, Lovato withdrew from the Jonas Brothers Live in Concert tour, entering a treatment facility for "physical and emotional issues". It was reported that she decided to enter treatment after punching female dancer Alex Welch; her management and family convinced her she needed help. Lovato said she took "100 percent, full responsibility" for the incident. On January 28, 2011, Lovato completed inpatient treatment at Timberline Knolls and returned home. She acknowledged that she had had bulimia, had harmed herself, and had been "self-medicating" with drugs and alcohol "like a lot of teens do to numb their pain". She added that she "basically had a nervous breakdown" and was diagnosed with bipolar disorder during her treatment. Lovato later said that she had used cocaine several times a day and smuggled cocaine onto airplanes.

In April 2011, Lovato became a contributing editor for Seventeen magazine, writing an article that described her struggles. In March 2012, MTV aired a documentary, Demi Lovato: Stay Strong, about her rehab and recovery. She began work on her fourth album the following month. In January 2013, it was reported that Lovato had been living in a sober-living facility in Los Angeles for more than a year because she felt it was the best way to avoid returning to her addictions and eating disorder. Lovato celebrated the six year anniversary of her sobriety on March 15, 2018. Lovato  started training in Brazilian jiu-jitsu in 2016.In her 2017 YouTube documentary Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated, Lovato revealed publicly that her treatment at Timberline Knolls was not entirely successful, stating that she still struggled with alcoholism and a cocaine addiction in the year following her stint in the treatment centre and further revealing that she was in fact under the influence of cocaine while being interviewed about her sobriety for Demi Lovato: Stay Strong. She stated: "I wasn't working my program. I wasn't ready to get sober. I was sneaking it on planes, sneaking it in bathrooms, sneaking it throughout the night. Nobody knew."Lovato also stated that her drug and alcohol addictions caused her to not only nearly overdose several times, but later began to impact her ability to perform and promote her third studio album Unbroken, referencing a 2012 performance on the eleventh season of American Idol where she was severely hungover. After her management team had expressed their intentions to leave her, Lovato agreed to resume treatment and counseling for her addictions, leading to her move to a sober-living facility in Los Angeles with roommates and responsibilities to help her overcome her drug and alcohol problems.On June 21, 2018, Lovato released "Sober" in which she revealed she had relapsed after six years of sobriety.On July 24, 2018, she was rushed to the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles after emergency services were called to her home due to an opioid overdose. She was reported to be stable and recovering later in the day. Lovato was reported to have overdosed on oxycodone laced with fentanyl and was revived with naloxone. She was hospitalized for two weeks and subsequently entered an in-patient rehab facility. In December 2018, Lovato took to Twitter to dismiss rumors about her overdose and went on to thank her fans, writing: "If I feel like the world needs to know something, I will tell them MYSELF.  All my fans need to know is I'm working hard on myself, I'm happy and clean and I'm SO grateful for their support." She went on to add that some day she'll "tell the world what exactly happened, why it happened and what my life is like today.. but until I’m ready to share that with people please stop prying and making up shit that you know nothing about. I still need space and time to heal."


== Activism ==
Lovato is an active supporter of gay rights. When the Defense of Marriage Act was struck down in June 2013, she tweeted: "Gay, straight, lesbian, bi. ... No one is better than any one else. What an incredible day for California AND for equality." Lovato later said: "I believe in gay marriage, I believe in equality. I think there's a lot of hypocrisy with religion. But I just found that you can have your own relationship with God, and I still have a lot of faith."On December 23, 2011, Lovato posted a message on Twitter criticizing her former network for airing episodes of Shake It Up and So Random! in which characters joked about eating disorders. Disney Channel publicity officials quickly took action, apologizing to Lovato and removing the episodes from the network's broadcast and video on demand sources after additional criticism (following Lovato's post) on the network's public-relations account.Lovato identifies as a feminist.Lovato spoke at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia about raising awareness for mental health, and also performed at the March for Our Lives anti-gun violence rally in Washington, D.C. in March 2018.


== Philanthropy ==

In May 2009, Lovato was named an Honorary Ambassador of Education by the American Partnership For Eosinophilic Disorders. As part of her involvement with Disney's Friends for Change, Lovato, the Jonas Brothers, Miley Cyrus and Selena Gomez recorded the initiative's theme song ("Send It On") in 2009. The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 20, and its proceeds were directed to environmental charities through the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund. Lovato and Joe Jonas recorded another song, "Make a Wave", for the charity in March 2010. She is also spokesperson for the Join the Surge Campaign!, DoSomething.Org and Joining the Surge by Clean & Clear; the latter is a national campaign encouraging teenagers to take action in their communities.Lovato was featured in a January 2010 public-service announcement for Voto Latino to promote the organization's "Be Counted" campaign preparing for the 2010 United States Census. In October 2010 she was the spokeswoman for the anti-bullying organization, PACER. Lovato participated in the "A Day Made Better" school advocacy campaign and has supported DonateMyDress.org, Kids Wish Network, Love Our Children USA, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and City of Hope. In April 2012 she became a contributing editor of Seventeen magazine, describing her personal struggles to its female teenage audience.In October Lovato was named the ambassador of Mean Stinks, a campaign focused on eliminating bullying by girls. In May 2013 she was cited for her dedication as a mentor to teens and young adults with mental-health problems at a National Children's Mental Health Awareness Day hosted by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in Washington. In late June 2013 Lovato announced the creation of the Lovato Treatment Scholarship Program, named for her late father, to pay treatment costs for mentally-ill patients. In August 2013, she traveled to Kenya for her 21st birthday to participate in a program of the international charity organization Free the Children.In May 2014, Lovato was named the LA Pride Parade Grand Marshal and the lead performer for NYC Pride Week for her contribution to the LGBT community. NYC Pride spokesperson Patti Diluigi said, "Demi Lovato is an amazing role model for today's youth, both LGBT and non-LGBT, for her activism in the area of equality, positive messaging on body image, and level of openness with her struggles. As a community, we're fortunate to have an ally like Demi." Lovato has also become the face of Human Rights Campaign's America's for Marriage Equality. For the announcement of the campaign, Lovato stated "Whether you're LGBT or straight, your love is valid, beautiful and an incredible love. So let's protect love and strengthen the institution of marriage by allowing loving, caring and committed same-sex couples to legally marry. Please join me and the majority of American citizens who support marriage equality." On April 2, 2016, Lovato received the GLAAD Vanguard Award for making a significant difference in promoting equal rights for the LGBT community at the 27th GLAAD Media Awards ceremony.In June 2016, Lovato was among the artists that signed an open letter to stop gun violence, created by Billboard. That month, the Human Rights Campaign also released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting; in the video, Lovato and others told the stories of the people killed there.In January 2017, Lovato returned to Kenya to participate in working with We Movement to do work with women and children. In March 2017, as a celebration of five-year anniversary of sobriety, Lovato donated money to Los Angeles-based charities, randomly selecting a group of causes based on their work, which included animal, LGBT and adoption rights. On March 22, Lovato will be honored with the Artistic Award of Courage at The Jane and Terry Semel Institute's biannual Open Mind Gala, which recognizes those who raise awareness and reduce the stigma of mental health issues.Lovato partnered with Fabletics in May 2017 on limited edition activewear collection. The collaboration was in support of the United Nations Foundation's Girl Up campaign to fund programs "for some of the world's most marginalized adolescent girls." On September 23, 2017, Lovato was named a Global Citizen ambassador for championing the mental health of thousands of children displaced within Iraq and other communities. Lovato and Global Citizen will fund the expansion of a Save the Children pilot program, Healing and Education through the Arts, to violence-scarred young people living around Kirkuk and Saladin Governorate, Iraq.


== Discography ==

Don't Forget (2008)
Here We Go Again (2009)
Unbroken (2011)
Demi (2013)
Confident (2015)
Tell Me You Love Me (2017)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Tours ==


== Awards and nominations ==

Demi Lovato has won several awards, including an award at the MTV Video Music Awards, one award at the ALMA Awards, five People's Choice Awards, a Billboard Women in Music award, a Guinness World Record and fourteen Teen Choice Awards. Lovato has received two Grammy Award nominations, four Billboard Music Awards nominations and three Brit Award nominations.


== Bibliography ==
Staying Strong: 365 Days a Year, Feiwel & Friends (November 19, 2013), ISBN 978-1-250-05144-8
Staying Strong: A Journal, Feiwel & Friends (October 7, 2014), ISBN 978-1-250-06352-6


== See also ==

List of people with bipolar disorder
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. dance chart
List of artists who reached number one on the Billboard Pop Songs chart


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Demi Lovato on IMDb