== Abstract == 
Epic Systems Corporation, or Epic,  is a privately held healthcare software company. According to the company, hospitals that use its software held medical records of 64% of patients in the United States and 2.5% of patients worldwide in 2015.


== History ==

Epic was founded in 1979 by Judith R. Faulkner with a $70,000 investment (equivalent to $240,000 in 2018). Originally headquartered in Madison, Wisconsin, Epic moved its headquarters to a large campus in the suburb of Verona, Wisconsin in 2005, where it employs more than 9,500 people as of January 2016. 
As of 2015, the company was in the fifth phase of campus expansion with five new buildings each planned to be around 100,000 square feet. The company also has offices in 's-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands; Dubai, United Arab Emirates; Helsinki, Finland; Melbourne, Australia; Singapore; and Søborg, Denmark.


== Product and market ==
Epic primarily develops, manufactures, licenses, supports, and sells a proprietary electronic medical record software application, known in whole as 'Epic' or an Epic EMR. The company offers an integrated suite of healthcare software centered on a Caché database provided by InterSystems. Epic's applications support functions related to patient care, including registration and scheduling; clinical systems for doctors, nurses, emergency personnel, and other care providers; systems for lab technologists, pharmacists, and radiologists; and billing systems for insurers.
Epic also offers hosted solutions for customers that do not wish to maintain their own servers; and short-term optimization and implementation consultants through their wholly owned subsidiary Boost Services.
Epic Systems was voted top overall software suite in the 2018 Best in KLAS awards; the company has received this award 8 years in a row. Epic Systems also took the top spot for overall physician practice vendor in 2018, receiving Best in KLAS awards in 7 segments.The company's competitors include Cerner, MEDITECH, Allscripts, athenahealth, and units of IBM, McKesson, Siemens and GE Healthcare. In 2003, Kaiser Permanente, the largest managed care organization in the United States, chose Epic for its electronic records system. Among many others, Epic provides electronic record systems for Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, the Cleveland Clinic, Johns Hopkins Hospital, The Mount Sinai Hospital, UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento, multiple campuses of the Mayo Clinic, and Yale–New Haven Hospital. Partners HealthCare began adopting Epic systems in 2015 in a project initially reported to cost $1.2 billion, which critics decried and which is greater than the cost of any of its buildings. By 2018, the total expenses for the project were $1.6 billion, with payments for the software itself amounting to less than $100 million and the majority of the costs caused by lost patient revenues, tech support and other implementation work.


== Concerns ==


=== Data sharing ===
Care Everywhere is Epic's health information exchange software, which comes with its EHR system. A 2014 article in The New York Times interviews two doctors who say that their Epic systems won't allow them to share data with users of competitors' software in a way that will satisfy Meaningful Use requirements in a 2009 law. At first, Epic charged a fee to send data to some non-Epic systems. Epic says the yearly cost for an average-sized hospital is around $5,000 a year. However, after Congressional hearings, Epic and other major software vendors announced that they would suspend per-transaction sharing fees. Epic customers must still pay for one-time costs of linking Epic systems to each individual non-Epic system with which they wish to exchange data; in contrast, Epic's competitors have formed the CommonWell Health Alliance which set a common interoperability standard for electronic health records. A 2014 report by the RAND Corporation described Epic as a "closed" platform that made it "challenging and costly for hospitals" to interconnect with the clinical or billing software of other companies. The report also cited other research showing that Epic's implementation in the Kaiser Permanente system led to efficiency losses. Implementation in the Hennepin Health system did not change outcomes for critically ill patients, however, physicians complained of workflow interruptions and slower processes of care.
In September 2017, Epic announced Share Everywhere, which allows patients to authorize any provider who has internet access to view their record in Epic and to send progress notes back.


=== UK experience ===
An Epic electronic health record system costing £200 million was installed at Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust in October 2014, the first installation of an Epic system in the UK.After 2.1 million records were transferred to it, it developed serious problems and the system became unstable. Ambulances were diverted to other hospitals for five hours and hospital consultants noted issues with blood transfusion and pathology services. Other problems included delays to emergency care and appointments, and problems with discharge letters, clinical letters and pathology test results. Chief information officer, Afzal Chaudhry, said "well over 90% of implementation proceeded successfully".In July 2015, the BBC reported that the hospital's finances were being investigated. In September 2015, both the CEO and CFO of the hospital resigned. Problems with the clinical-records system, which were said to have compromised the "ability to report, highlight and take action on data" and to prescribe medication properly, were held to be contributory factors in the organization's sudden failure. In February 2016, digitalhealth.net reported that Clare Marx, president of the Royal College of Surgeons of England and member of the NHS National Information Board, found that at the time of implementation, "staff, patients and management rapidly and catastrophically lost confidence in the system. That took months and a huge amount of effort to rebuild."


=== Danish experience ===
Danish health authorities spent 2.8 billion DKK on the implementation of an Epic system for the two largest health regions in Denmark. An audit of the implementation that voiced concerns was published in June 2018.


== See also ==
Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Epic, state's largest solar producer, to build own wind farm - Milwaukee Journal Sentinel article
Epic Systems feeling heat over interoperability - Modern healthcare article
Epic Systems, Leading Defense EHR Bidder, Slammed for Lack of Interoperability  - Nextgov article
Patient records giant Epic Systems will take a big step into the cloud in 2015 - VentureBeat article
Cancer moonshot head recounts exchange with Epic’s Faulkner - Politico article