== Abstract == 
IBM Internet Security Systems, formerly Internet Security Systems, and often known simply as ISS or ISSX (after its former NASDAQ ticker symbol) is a security software provider founded in 1994. The company was acquired by IBM in 2006.


== History ==
In 1992, while attending the Georgia Institute of Technology, Christopher Klaus developed the first version of Internet Security Scanner. In 1994, Chris Klaus founded Internet Security Systems (ISS) to further develop and market Internet Security Scanner, which later became Internet Scanner. Although the larger shareholder, Chris Klaus took the role of Chief Technology Officer, whilst Tom Noonan was recruited as Chief Executive Officer in 1995. In 1996 David Strohm from Greylock Ventures and Bob Davoli, from Sigma Partners, led the first round of venture capital investment in ISS. In 1997, Ted Schlein from Kleiner Perkins and ATT Ventures invested in the next round.    The initial public offering of the company on NASDAQ was on March 23, 1998.Further products in security software space followed, including Network Sensor and Server Sensor which were both developed in-house. In 1998, ISS acquired the UK company March Information Systems, and rebranded their Security Manager product as System Scanner. About the same time, ISS acquired the company DbSecure, founded by Eric Gonzales and Aaron C. Newman, to add a database security solution to their products. The DbSecure product was rebranded as Database Scanner. Subsequently, ISS acquired Network ICE and integrated their BlackICE technology into the ISS product range.In 2004 Chris Klaus stepped down from his role of Chief Technology Officer to pursue other interests, although he remained a significant shareholder and a role as the company's Chief Security Advisor.  His role as Chief Technology Officer was taken by Chris Rouland.On 23 August 2006, IBM announced its intention to acquire Internet Security Systems for $1.36 billion and its Japanese subsidiary, ISS KK, for additional $570M. Total acquisition transaction size was $1.93 billion.   On 16 October 2006, the deal was approved by ISS shareholders.


== Products ==
IBM has since discontinued ISS' signature product, the Proventia multifunction security appliance.  This occurred after a long decline in tech support and licensing renewal service associated with the product.Current and former product families of ISS include:
BlackICE
Internet Scanner
Network Sensor
Proventia
RealSecure
Secure Log Manager
Server Sensor
Site Protector
System ScannerCurrently supported products include:

Endpoint Secure Control
Enterprise Scanner
Internet Scanner
IBM Open Signatures
IBM Security Network Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
Proventia Desktop
Proventia Management SiteProtector
Proventia Management SiteProtector Web Console
Proventia Network Mail Security
Proventia Network Multi-Function Security
Proventia Server Intrusion Prevention System for Linux
Proventia Server Intrusion Prevention System for Windows
Proventia Web Application Security
Proventia Web Filter
Virtual Server Protection for VMWare


== Location ==
IBM Internet Security Systems is headquartered in Sandy Springs, near Atlanta (Georgia, United States). Until late 2003 the company had significant development activities in Mountain View (California, United States), Reading (UK) and Sydney (Australia), but all development has since been relocated to Atlanta. The company also maintains sales offices worldwide.IBM Security Solutions providing support for IBM Internet Security Systems' products have support center offices worldwide
Sandy Springs, near Atlanta (Georgia, United States) (where IBM Internet Security Systems is headquartered)
Brussels, Belgium
Brisbane, Australia
Tokyo, Japan
Bangalore, India
Hortolandia, Brazil
Southfield, Michigan, United States
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Boulder, United States
Kraków, Poland
Heredia, Costa Rica


== External links ==
IBM Internet Security Systems corporate website
archive of technical papers and utilities for RealSecure


== References ==

BlackIce Defender tiny, small, IDS / Firewall Giant
IBM Security App Uses Analytics To Target Internal Threats