== Abstract == 
Jess Franco (born  Jesús Franco Manera; 12 May 1930 – 2 April 2013) was a Spanish filmmaker, composer, and actor, best known for his stylish exploitation films, directing around 160 feature films.


== Biography ==
Of Cuban and Mexican parentage, Franco was born in Madrid and studied at the city's Instituto de Investigaciones y Experiencias Cinematográficas and the Institut des hautes études cinématographiques in Paris. He began his career in 1954 (aged 24) as an assistant director in the Spanish film industry, performing many tasks including composing music for some of the films as well as co-writing a number of the screenplays. He assisted a number of directors such as Joaquín Luis Romero Marchent, Leon Klimovsky and Juan Antonio Bardem. After working on more than 20 films, he decided to get into directing films in 1959, making a few musicals and a crime drama called Red Lips.
In 1960, Franco took Marius Lesoeur and Sergio Newman, two producer friends, to a cinema to see the newly released Hammer horror film The Brides of Dracula and the three men decided to get into the horror film business. His career took off in 1961 with The Awful Dr. Orloff (a.k.a. Gritos en la noche), which received wide distribution in the United States and the UK. Franco wrote and directed Orloff, and even supplied some of the music for the film. In the mid-1960s, he went on to direct two other horror films, then proceeded to turn out a number of James Bond-like spy thrillers and softcore sex films based on the works of the Marquis de Sade (which remained one of his major influences throughout his career).
Although he had some American box office success with Necronomicon (1967), 99 Women (1968) and two 1969 Christopher Lee films — The Bloody Judge and Count Dracula — he never achieved wide commercial success. Many of his films were only distributed in Europe, and most of them were never dubbed into English.
After discovering Soledad Miranda (he first used her in his Count Dracula), Franco moved from Spain to France in 1969 so that he could make more violent and erotic films free of the strict censorship in Spain, and it was at this point that his career began to go downhill commercially as he turned to low-budget filmmaking with an accent on adult material. Soledad Miranda starred in a series of six erotic thrillers for Franco, all made within a one-year period (including Vampyros Lesbos), after which she was killed in a tragic automobile accident in Portugal in 1970, just as her career was taking off.
A year or two after Soledad Miranda died, a grieving Franco discovered a new leading lady in actress Lina Romay. At the time, the teenage Romay was married to a young actor/photographer named Ramon Ardid, but as she and Franco became more involved in their film projects together over the years, her marriage to Ramon ended in divorce around 1975. 
Franco was married at the time to Nicole Guettard (their marriage running approximately from 1962 through 1980), Ms. Guettard being gradually replaced in Franco's life by Lina Romay (Nicole worked as a script consultant on many of Franco's films while they were married, and even acted in a few of them. Her daughter from an earlier marriage, Caroline Riviere, also appeared in a few Franco films in the early 1970s (including the risque Exorcisme and The Perverse Countess)).
Franco and Lina Romay worked together for 40 years, and lived together from 1980 onward, although they were only officially married on 25 April, 2008. Until her death in 2012 (from cancer at age 57), Romay was his most regular actress, as well as his life companion and muse.
Although he produced a number of relatively successful horror films in the early 70's (Dracula vs. Frankenstein, The Bare-Breasted Countess, A Virgin Among the Living Dead), many people in the industry considered him a porn director due to the huge number of X-rated adult films he began turning out (even his 70's horror films featured abundant nudity). Franco returned to low-budget horror in a brief comeback period from 1980-83 (Mondo Cannibale, Bloody Moon, Oasis of the Zombies, Revenge in the House of Usher), but after 1983, his career took a second downturn as he returned to making mostly pornographic films, most of which left nothing to the imagination.
In his later years, he did, however, get the opportunity to turn out two rather big-budget horror films — Faceless (1988) and Killer Barbys (1996) — both of which showed what great work he could still do when his projects were adequately funded. The entirety of his work after 1996 was direct-to-video films of very low quality, none of which were distributed theatrically. Romay died of cancer in 2012, after which Franco died in April 2013 from natural causes, aged 82.Franco sometimes worked under various pseudonyms, including David Khune and Frank Hollmann. A fan of jazz music (and a musician himself), many of his pseudonyms were taken from jazz musicians such as Clifford Brown and James P. Johnson.
Franco's themes often revolved around lesbian vampires, women in prison, surgical horror, sadomasochism, zombies and sexploitation (including several films based on the writings of the Marquis de Sade). He worked in other exploitation film genres, such as cannibal films, spy films, giallo, crime films, science fiction, jungle adventure, Oriental menace, exorcist films, war movies, historical dramas and nunsploitation. His sex movies often contained long, uninterrupted shots of nude women writhing around on beds. Most of his hardcore films starred his lifelong companion Lina Romay, who admitted in interviews to being an exhibitionist.
Franco was known for his use of a hand-held camera and zoom shots, which he felt lent realism to his films. He also was not averse to filming several movies at the same time, knocking together a second feature on the unsuspecting producer's dime. Many of his actors only found out years after the fact that Franco had actually starred them in films for which they had never even been paid.
His main claim to fame, however, is that he managed to write and direct around 160 motion pictures in his lifetime, encompassing a wide swath of different genres, with practically no financial backing available to him. (Note* - Some sources which list as many as 200 titles in Franco's filmography are relisting the same films several times under different variant titles).
Franco attracted a circle of bizarre but loyal actors and technicians who moved with him over the years from project to project (while receiving very little, if any, money for their efforts). Many of his actors were over-the-hill performers in the twilight of their careers, many of his actresses shameless exhibitionists. He frequently worked with genre actors Howard Vernon, Paul Müller, Christopher Lee, Jack Taylor, Ewa Stromberg, Soledad Miranda, Maria Rohm, Monica Swinn, William Berger, Dennis Price, Alice Arno, Montserrat Prous, Alberto Dalbes, Britt Nichols, Pamela Stanford, Kali Hansa and Klaus Kinski, all of whom are well-known to cult film collectors.


=== Zombie Lake vs. Oasis of the Zombies ===
Franco was supposed to write & direct a film for Eurocine Productions in 1980 called Lake of the Living Dead (a horror film about revived Nazi zombies) but after submitting the script, he had a falling out with the producers, Marius and Daniel Lesouer, who immediately hired French horror film director Jean Rollin to direct it (later retitling it Zombie Lake). Many fans regard this as a Franco film, although Franco only contributed to the script. Rollin later said in interviews he only did the film as a favor for the Lesoeurs, and that if he knew "how bad" the script was, he would not have done it.
The Lesoeurs later had Rollin shoot new zombie footage in 1981 to be added to Franco's A Virgin Among the Living Dead (1973) for its 1981 re-release. Recently, Franco purists insisted that Virgin be released in its former unadulterated form on DVD, as the added Jean Rollin footage greatly slowed down the pace of the film and was really only filler material.
Franco later directed another film for the Lesouers called Oasis of the Zombies (a.k.a. Bloodsucking Nazi Zombies on VHS) in 1981, which had a plot very similar to Zombie Lake (also involving revived Nazi zombies). Franco simultaneously shot a variant version of Oasis of the Zombies (on the producers' dime) starring Lina Romay and his "regulars" which was apparently released only in Spain, under the title La Tumba de los Muertos Vivientes (which may well be lost).


=== Death ===
Franco suffered a severe stroke on 27 March 2013, and was taken to a hospital in Málaga, Spain, where he died early on the morning of 2 April. He was 82 years old.


== Filmography (in order of production) ==
(all films directed by Franco unless noted otherwise)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Stephen Thrower, Murderous Passions: The Delirious Cinema of Jesús Franco (2015)
Jess Franco, Memorias del tío Jess (2004) (autobiography, in Spanish)
Stéphane du Mesnilot, Jess Franco - Énergies du fantasme (2004, in French)
Alain Petit, Manacoa Files (1994–1999, in French)
Lucas Balbo, Peter Blumenstock, Christian Kessler, Tim Lucas, Obsession - The Films of Jess Franco (1993)
Tim Lucas, "How to Read a Franco Film", in Video Watchdog #1 (1990)"Article". Archived from the original on 2009-10-14. Retrieved 2008-06-22.
The book Immoral Tales: European Sex & Horror Movies 1956-1984 (1994), by Cathal Tohill and Pete Tombs, dedicates a chapter to Franco.
Xavier Mendik. "Perverse Bodies, Profane Texts: Processes of Sadeian 'Mixture' in the Films of Jesus Franco" in Andy Black (ed.), Necronomicon: The Journal of Horror and Erotic Cinema Book Two London: Creation Books, 1998, pp. 6–29.
Benedikt Eppenberger, Daniel Stapfer. Mädchen, Machos und Moneten: Die unglaubliche Geschichte des Schweizer Kinounternehmers Erwin C. Dietrich. Mit einem Vorwort von Jess Franco. Verlag Scharfe Stiefel, Zurich, 2006, ISBN 3-033-00960-3
(in Italian) Robert Monell, "Il codice segreto di Jesús Franco", in Nocturno Dossier n. 60, luglio 2007
Robert Monell, essays on Devil Hunter/Il Cacciatore di Uomini and The Cannibals/'White Cannibal Queen in Eaten Alive: Italian Cannibal and Zombie Movies pp. 145–148 Edited by Jay Slater, Plexus Publishing Limited, London (2002)
Robert Monell, Foreword: "Jess Franco--Cinema Degree Zero" in Il Caso Jesus Franco, edited by Francesco Cesari, (2010, in English, Italian and Spanish) Granviale Editore, Venezia, Italy, pp. 11–12.


== External links ==
Jesús Franco on IMDb 
Santo and Friends (Hispanic horror film index)