== Abstract == 
Kate del Castillo Negrete Trillo (Spanish pronunciation: [ˈka.te ðel kasˈtiʝo neˈɣɾete ˈtɾiʝo]; born October 23, 1972) is a Mexican-American actress. At the age of 20, del Castillo became known for her lead role in the telenovela Muchachitas for Televisa in 1991. Afterwards, she continued her career in film and television in Latin America. In 2011, del Castillo earned recognition in the United States for playing the lead role in La Reina del Sur. Subsequently, del Castillo has worked in several American TV series and had supporting roles in Hollywood feature films.


== Early life ==
Del Castillo was born in Mexico City, Mexico. She is the daughter of Kate Trillo and Eric del Castillo, a legend of Mexican cinema and a soap opera actor himself. Del Castillo has two siblings:  a sister, the journalist Verónica del Castillo, and a half-brother, Ponciano, from her father's side.


== Career ==
She made her acting debut in 1978 when she took part in a film called The Last Escape. She became well known in 1991 when she starred as Leticia in Muchachitas, a telenovela airing in several Latin American countries. In 1995 she appeared in the music video "Fuego de Noche, Nieve de Día" by Ricky Martin.
In 2002 and 2003, she embarked on an international tour alongside Argentine actor Saul Lisazo with the play Cartas de Amor (Love Letters). In November 2007, she was named one of the "Stars of the Year" and in 2011 one of the "25 most influential women" and "50 most beautiful" by People en Español magazine. In 2006, Del Castillo starred in the film Bordertown, which became her first role in Hollywood. In 2009, del Castillo was appointed Ambassador for the Mexican Commission on Human Rights and the following year she helped launch the Blue Heart Campaign in order to raise awareness and fight human trafficking. In 2011, she starred as Teresa "La Mexicana" Mendoza in La reina del sur, a role that skyrocketed her fame across Latin America. del Castillo continued her collaboration with Telemundo in 2015, starring in Duenos del Paraiso. She later starred in the film Colosio: El asesinato, which centers around the assassination of the Mexican presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio. del Castillo has also appeared in advertising campaigns for L'Oréal and Ford.In November 20, 2015 she launched a new brand of tequila named Honor del Castillo in association with the Vivanco Family. She serves as the spokesperson for the brand.


== Personal life ==

One of del Castillo's first known romantic relations was with Emilio Azcarraga Jean son of media mogul Emilio Azcárraga Milmo, and now CEO of the largest mass media company in Latin America, the Televisa Grup. On February 3, 2001, she married fútbol player Luis García. The marriage was dissolved on September 1, 2004. In August 2009, del Castillo married Aarón Díaz in a Las Vegas ceremony. On July 26, 2011, it was announced that Kate and Díaz were separating. del Castillo was briefly romantically connected with Sean Penn from 2015 to 2016, although the actor's representatives contest this. It has been frequently asserted in the media that del Castillo was romantically involved with Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman, allegations that the actress vehemently denies.
On August 22, 2005, it was reported by the LAPD that del Castillo's new house in Los Angeles had been broken into by thieves, who took some jewelry from the actress. Del Castillo was in Los Angeles filming Bordertown, a film about the female homicides in Ciudad Juárez, when the burglary occurred. A frequent activist for a variety of causes, she posed in a 2012 PETA ad campaign encouraging pet owners to "fiercely protect" their dogs and cats by keeping them indoors. She became a citizen of the United States in September 2015 and currently resides in Los Angeles.During an interview with Cristina Saralegui on the Cristina Show, del Castillo revealed that her favorite band is the English new wave band Duran Duran.


== Relationship with Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman Loera ==
On January 9, 2012, del Castillo publicly posted an essay on Twitter (using Twextra) discussing social issues in Mexico that included controversial statements directed towards Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the infamous head of the Sinaloa Cartel. The essay included requests to Mr. Guzman to "deal with love, with good things" and to "[begin to] traffic in love." The most controversial portion of the essay stated:  "Today I believe more in Chapo Guzmán [than in] the government that hides painful truths from me, that hides the cure for cancer, AIDS, etc., for their own benefit and wealth." Unbeknownst to del Castillo, Guzman was a longtime fan who harbored romantic feelings for her. Authorities found DVDs of La Reina del Sur at the safe house stormed during Guzman's initial capture. Del Castillo was contacted by Guzman's lawyer to discuss producing a biographical film about Guzman in 2014. As a result of the meetings, she obtained the rights to his life and was unknowingly placed under CISEN surveillance. Communication increased following Guzman's escape from prison in July 2015. She received a cell phone and the code names Hermosa and Dama from Guzman. She brokered an interview between American actor Sean Penn and Guzmán in October 2015, shortly before Mexican Marines recaptured him (del Castillo claims in her documentary for Netflix that she did not know Penn intended to interview the drug lord during the meeting). CISEN later released photographs of del Castillo at the meetings with Guzman's lawyer and of the arrival of the actress and Penn to Mexico.


=== Aftermath ===
Sean Penn and Del Castillo's actions remain under investigation by the PGR. She was subpoenaed on January 18, 2016 and was to testify before the public prosecutor at the Mexican Consulate in Los Angeles. del Castillo was originally under investigation for money laundering in relation to the planned movie about Guzmán and her tequila brand Honor del Castillo. Said investigation was suspended in 2017 as there was no evidence that proved that Guzmán ever paid del Castillo any money.
On February 5, 2016, a Mexican judge granted del Castillo's petition for an injunction against any arrest related to the federal investigation into her ties with Joaquín Guzmán. The Mexican Attorney General issued a detain-and-interrogate order on del Castillo; however, that would only become effective if del Castillo set foot on Mexican soil. That order was issued after she did not heed a request to voluntarily appear before Mexican prosecutors.Kate del Castillo has not returned to Mexico since the injunction was issued and filming locations for Ingobernable were changed to San Diego to accommodate restrictions on her travel.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Awards ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Draper, Robert (March 21, 2016). "The go-between : the Mexican actress who dazzled El Chapo". A Reporter at Large. The New Yorker. 92 (6): 66–75.


== External links ==
Kate del Castillo's Official Website
Kate del Castillo's Official Fan Club
Kate del Castillo on IMDb 
Kate del Castillo at Rotten Tomatoes
Vidas Cruzadas - Webnovela
Tequila Honor del Castillo Official Website