== Abstract == 
Sōsuke Uno (宇野 宗佑, Uno Sōsuke, 27 August 1922 – 19 May 1998) was a Japanese politician and the 47th Prime Minister of Japan from 3 June 1989 to 10 August 1989.


== Biography ==
Sōsuke Uno was born in Moriyama, Shiga, the son of a successful brewer. He attended the Kobe University of Commerce after serving as an officer in the Imperial Japanese Army during World War II. As well as a politician Sōsuke was a accomplished writer, who wrote a book considered classic in Japan about his experiences as a prisoner of war in Siberia. 
In 1960 he entered politics, winning election to the Diet of Japan. Six years later he was promoted to Vice-Minister at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, then similar positions with the Science and Technology Agency, then the Administrative Agency until earning his place in Cabinet as Minister for Trade and Industry and then Foreign Secretary until he was Prime Minister. Whilst Foreign Secretary (in what were conflicted times) he was applauded for his tact as foreign secretary, navigating international demands for increased Japanese contributions to international commerce with stern loyalty to his own nation's interests.
Uno's career reached a peak in the most fraught times his party had seen, as he took the reigns of his party after the Recruit Scandal, when 47 Japanese MPs (including mostly other members from his own Liberal Democrat Party) were found guilty of taking bribes and unfair trading. Of all prime-ministerial candidates, only Uno was free of blame from them, and he was given charge over the party, the government, and Japan. By this stage he had served his country for almost fifty years, and was placed in office on 3 June 1989.
The prime minister then resigned after 68 days after what now appears to be an outright hoax. A purported accusation levelled by an anonymous geisha was published in American newspapers (contemporary rivals to Japan).The controversy surrounding Uno's alleged activity was focused on irresponsibility to support the Geisha rather than a more salacious accusation of immorality. Uno was accused specifically that he had not properly provided the press' claimed "anonymous mistress" with appropriate fee for her company, which would have been very poor form by relevant cultural standards. From no separate cause but the English language reports, he was branded as an unkind man. The story was not publicized in Japan until a Washington Post article, bringing international attention to Uno.To avoid further scandal, after the Washington Post's story, Sōsuke Uno resigned as prime minister in August 1989, but continued to serve his country in various government posts until he retired fully in 1996. On 29 April 1994, he was awarded with the highest possible honour for a non-head-of-state, the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia Flowers. .   
At 72 years of age, Sōsuke Uno then enjoyed a peaceful retirement until his death in 1998 in his home of Moriyama. Having published two collections of haikus, as well as his book on prisonership in Siberia for which he is now best-known - he practiced in his retirement his passions of painting, poetry, and music.


== Honours ==
From the corresponding article in the Japanese Wikipedia

Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun with Paulownia Flowers (29 April 1994)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
West, Mark D. (2006). Secrets, Sex, and Spectacle: The Rules of Scandal in Japan and the United States. Chicago University Press. ISBN 978-0-226-89408-9.